<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Atsumori</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="atsumori" epub:type="z3998:drama">
			<h2>Atsumori</h2>
			<p>In the eleventh century two powerful clans, the Taira and the Minamoto, contended for mastery. In 1181 Kiyomori the chief of the Tairas died, and from that time their fortunes declined. In 1183 they were forced to flee from Kyōto, carrying with them the infant Emperor. After many hardships and wanderings they camped on the shores of Suma, where they were protected by their fleet.</p>
			<p>Early in 1184 the Minamotos attacked and utterly routed them at the Battle of Ichi-no-Tani, near the woods of Ikuta. At this battle fell Atsumori, the nephew of Kiyomori, and his brother Tsunemasa.</p>
			<p>When Kumagai, who had slain Atsumori, bent over him to examine the body, he found lying beside him a bamboo-flute wrapped in brocade. He took the flute and gave it to his son.</p>
			<p>The bay of Suma is associated in the mind of a Japanese reader not only with this battle but also with the stories of Prince Genji and Prince Yukihira.</p>
			<p>(See p. <a class="pginternal" href="#Page_226">226</a>.)</p>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_36">[36]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<h3 class="break">ATSUMORI</h3>
			<p class="center p2">By SEAMI</p>
			<p class="center p2">PERSONS</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<i>THE PRIEST RENSEI (formerly the warrior Kumagai).</i>
				</li>
				<li>
					<i>A YOUNG REAPER, who turns out to be the ghost of Atsumori.</i>
				</li>
				<li>
					<i>HIS COMPANION.</i>
				</li>
				<li>
					<i>CHORUS.</i>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Life is a lying dream, he only wakes<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Who casts the World aside.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>I am Kumagai no Naozane, a man of the country of Musashi. I have left my home and call myself the priest Rensei; this I have done because of my grief at the death of Atsumori, who fell in battle by my hand. Hence it comes that I am dressed in priestly guise.</p>
			<p>And now I am going down to Ichi-no-Tani to pray for the salvation of Atsumori’s soul.</p>
			<div class="blockquot">
				<p>(<i>He walks slowly across the stage, singing a song descriptive of his journey.</i>)</p>
			</div>
			<p>I have come so fast that here I am already at Ichi-no-Tani, in the country of Tsu.</p>
			<p>Truly the past returns to my mind as though it were a thing of to-day.</p>
			<p>But listen! I hear the sound of a flute coming from a knoll of rising ground. I will wait here till the flute-player passes, and ask him to tell me the story of this place.</p>
			<p class="speaker">REAPERS (<i>together</i>).</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">To the music of the reaper’s flute<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">No song is sung<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But the sighing of wind in the fields.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">YOUNG REAPER.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">They that were reaping,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Reaping on that hill,<br/></span>
					<span class="pagenum">
						<a id="Page_37">[37]</a>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">Walk now through the fields<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Homeward, for it is dusk.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">REAPERS (<i>together</i>).</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Short is the way that leads<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a><br/></span>
					<span class="i0">From the sea of Suma back to my home.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">This little journey, up to the hill<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And down to the shore again, and up to the hill⁠—<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">This is my life, and the sum of hateful tasks.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">If one should ask me<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">I too<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> would answer<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">That on the shores of Suma<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">I live in sadness.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Yet if any guessed my name,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Then might I too have friends.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But now from my deep misery<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Even those that were dearest<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Are grown estranged. Here must I dwell abandoned<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">To one thought’s anguish:<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">That I must dwell here.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>Hey, you reapers! I have a question to ask you.</p>
			<p class="speaker">YOUNG REAPER.</p>
			<p>Is it to us you are speaking? What do you wish to know?</p>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>Was it one of you who was playing on the flute just now?</p>
			<p class="speaker">YOUNG REAPER.</p>
			<p>Yes, it was we who were playing.</p>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>It was a pleasant sound, and all the pleasanter because one does not look for such music from men of your condition.</p>
			<p class="speaker">YOUNG REAPER.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Unlooked for from men of our condition, you say!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Have you not read:⁠—<br/></span>
					<span class="pagenum">
						<a id="Page_38">[38]</a>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">“Do not envy what is above you<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Nor despise what is below you”?<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Moreover the songs of woodmen and the flute-playing of herdsmen,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Flute-playing even of reapers and songs of wood-fellers<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Through poets’ verses are known to all the world.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Wonder not to hear among us<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">The sound of a bamboo-flute.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">You are right. Indeed it is as you have told me.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Songs of woodmen and flute-playing of herdsmen⁠ ⁠… <br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">REAPER.</p>
			<p>Flute-playing of reapers⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>Songs of wood-fellers⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">REAPERS.</p>
			<p>Guide us on our passage through this sad world.</p>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>Song⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">REAPER.</p>
			<p>And dance⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>And the flute⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">REAPER.</p>
			<p>And music of many instruments⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">CHORUS.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">These are the pastimes that each chooses to his taste.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Of floating bamboo-wood<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Many are the famous flutes that have been made;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Little-Branch and Cicada-Cage,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And as for the reaper’s flute,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Its name is Green-leaf;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">On the shore of Sumiyoshi<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">The Corean flute they play.<br/></span>
					<span class="pagenum">
						<a id="Page_39">[39]</a>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">And here on the shore of Suma<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">On Stick of the Salt-kilns<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">The fishers blow their tune.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>How strange it is! The other reapers have all gone home, but you alone stay loitering here. How is that?</p>
			<p class="speaker">REAPER.</p>
			<p>How is it, you ask? I am seeking for a prayer in the voice of the evening waves. Perhaps you will pray the Ten Prayers for me?</p>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>I can easily pray the Ten Prayers for you, if you will tell me who you are.</p>
			<p class="speaker">REAPER.</p>
			<p>To tell you the truth⁠—I am one of the family of Lord Atsumori.</p>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">One of Atsumori’s family? How glad I am!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Then the priest joined his hands (<i>he kneels down</i>) and prayed:⁠—<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="center">NAMU AMIDABU.</p>
			<p>Praise to Amida Buddha!</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“If I attain to Buddhahood,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">In the whole world and its ten spheres<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Of all that dwell here none shall call on my name<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And be rejected or cast aside.”<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">CHORUS.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“Oh, reject me not!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">One cry suffices for salvation,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Yet day and night<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Your prayers will rise for me.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Happy am I, for though you know not my name,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Yet for my soul’s deliverance<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">At dawn and dusk henceforward I know that you will pray.”<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>So he spoke. Then vanished and was seen no more.</p>
			<div class="blockquot">
				<p>(<i>Here follows the Interlude between the two Acts, in which a recitation concerning Atsumori’s death takes place. These<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_40">[40]</a></span> interludes are subject to variation and are not considered part of the literary text of the play.</i>)</p>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>Since this is so, I will perform all night the rites of prayer for the dead, and calling upon Amida’s name will pray again for the salvation of Atsumori.</p>
			<div class="blockquot">
				<p>(<i>The ghost of</i> ATSUMORI <i>appears, dressed as a young warrior</i>.)</p>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Would you know who I am<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">That like the watchmen at Suma Pass<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Have wakened at the cry of sea-birds roaming<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Upon Awaji shore?<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Listen, Rensei. I am Atsumori.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>How strange! All this while I have never stopped beating my gong and performing the rites of the Law. I cannot for a moment have dozed, yet I thought that Atsumori was standing before me. Surely it was a dream.</p>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<p>Why need it be a dream? It is to clear the karma of my waking life that I am come here in visible form before you.</p>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>Is it not written that one prayer will wipe away ten thousand sins? Ceaselessly I have performed the ritual of the Holy Name that clears all sin away. After such prayers, what evil can be left? Though you should be sunk in sin as deep⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">As the sea by a rocky shore,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Yet should I be salved by prayer.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>And that my prayers should save you⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">This too must spring<br/></span>
					<span class="pagenum">
						<a id="Page_41">[41]</a>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">From kindness of a former life.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a><br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>Once enemies⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<p>But now⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>In truth may we be named⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<p>Friends in Buddha’s Law.</p>
			<p class="speaker">CHORUS.</p>
			<p>There is a saying, “Put away from you a wicked friend; summon to your side a virtuous enemy.” For you it was said, and you have proven it true.</p>
			<p>And now come tell with us the tale of your confession, while the night is still dark.</p>
			<p class="speaker">CHORUS.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">He<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> bids the flowers of Spring<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Mount the tree-top that men may raise their eyes<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And walk on upward paths;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">He bids the moon in autumn waves be drowned<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">In token that he visits laggard men<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And leads them out from valleys of despair.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Now the clan of Taira, building wall to wall,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Spread over the earth like the leafy branches of a great tree:<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">CHORUS.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Yet their prosperity lasted but for a day;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">It was like the flower of the convolvulus.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">There was none to tell them<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a><br/></span>
					<span class="pagenum">
						<a id="Page_42">[42]</a>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">That glory flashes like sparks from flint-stone,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And after⁠—darkness.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Oh wretched, the life of men!<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">When they were on high they afflicted the humble;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">When they were rich they were reckless in pride.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And so for twenty years and more<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">They ruled this land.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But truly a generation passes like the space of a dream.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">The leaves of the autumn of Juyei<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a><br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Were tossed by the four winds;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Scattered, scattered (like leaves too) floated their ships.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And they, asleep on the heaving sea, not even in dreams<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Went back to home.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Caged birds longing for the clouds⁠—<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Wild geese were they rather, whose ranks are broken<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">As they fly to southward on their doubtful journey.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">So days and months went by; Spring came again<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And for a little while<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Here dwelt they on the shore of Suma<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">At the first valley.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a><br/></span>
					<span class="i0">From the mountain behind us the winds blew down<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Till the fields grew wintry again.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Our ships lay by the shore, where night and day<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">The sea-gulls cried and salt waves washed on our sleeves.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">We slept with fishers in their huts<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">On pillows of sand.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">We knew none but the people of Suma.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And when among the pine-trees<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">The evening smoke was rising,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Brushwood, as they call it,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a><br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Brushwood we gathered<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And spread for carpet.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Sorrowful we lived<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">On the wild shore of Suma,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Till the clan Taira and all its princes<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Were but villagers of Suma.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_43">[43]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">But on the night of the sixth day of the second month<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">My father Tsunemori gathered us together.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“To-morrow,” he said, “we shall fight our last fight.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">To-night is all that is left us.”<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">We sang songs together, and danced.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Yes, I remember; we in our siege-camp<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Heard the sound of music<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Echoing from your tents that night;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">There was the music of a flute⁠ ⁠… <br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<p>The bamboo-flute! I wore it when I died.</p>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>We heard the singing⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<p>Songs and ballads⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="speaker">PRIEST.</p>
			<p>Many voices</p>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<p>Singing to one measure.</p>
			<div class="blockquot">
				<p>(ATSUMORI <i>dances</i>.)</p>
			</div>
			<p>First comes the Royal Boat.</p>
			<p class="speaker">CHORUS.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">The whole clan has put its boats to sea.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">He<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> will not be left behind;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">He runs to the shore.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But the Royal Boat and the soldiers’ boats<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Have sailed far away.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">ATSUMORI.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">What can he do?<br/></span>
					<span class="pagenum">
						<a id="Page_44">[44]</a>
					</span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">He spurs his horse into the waves.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">He is full of perplexity.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And then<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="speaker">CHORUS.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">He looks behind him and sees<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">That Kumagai pursues him;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">He cannot escape.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Then Atsumori turns his horse<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Knee-deep in the lashing waves,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And draws his sword.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Twice, three times he strikes; then, still saddled,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">In close fight they twine; roll headlong together<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Among the surf of the shore.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">So Atsumori fell and was slain, but now the Wheel of Fate<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Has turned and brought him back.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="blockquot">
				<p>(ATSUMORI <i>rises from the ground and advances toward the</i> PRIEST <i>with uplifted sword</i>.)</p>
			</div>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“There is my enemy,” he cries, and would strike,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But the other is grown gentle<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And calling on Buddha’s name<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Has obtained salvation for his foe;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">So that they shall be re-born together<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">On one lotus-seat.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“No, Rensei is not my enemy.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Pray for me again, oh pray for me again.”<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
